---
title: Unpack COVID-19 research themes and urban indications
author: Yuan Lai
date: 2020-06-19T00:00:00.000Z
tags:
  - Covid
  - Data
  - Visualization
hero: images/dashboard.png
---
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic brings broad and deep impacts worldwide, calling for all research efforts to tackle the uncertainty and urgency involving this novel virus. The new virus (SARS-CoV-2) with unknown pathogens, epidemiological characteristics, and transmission patterns, inevitably brings inconsistency, discrepancies, and debates among the science community. On the other hand, the rapid transmission speed and large scale of the infected population require some timely responses despite the above uncertainties.

## Processing COVID-19 manuscripts metadata

On March 17th, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy launched a [COVID-19 AI OPEN Research Dataset Challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-research-challenge) in a partnership with Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence (AI2), the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Microsoft Research, Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology, and National Institutes of Health. This challenge is hosted on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/), an online community of data scientists and machine learning experts owned by Google. The core challenge is to utilize data science and machine learning for better collection, organization, and audition of surging manuscripts. This data exploration aims to unpack the domains and progression of COVID-19 related studies by unpacking currently available research publications. We adopt both quantitative and qualitative methods from computer science and urban planning. Its goal is to stimulate interdisciplinary discussion and research collaboration, and support more inclusive approaches to address some immediate and long-term problems. We first summarize a retrospective overview of COVID-19 research challenges and progression in the data science community through this Kaggle challenge. Text analysis and visualization identify several key findings and critical factors that are highly relevant to COVID-19. 

The published dataset contains more than 29,000 research articles (over 13,000 with full text) on SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 clinical studies, public health response, population characteristics, and epidemiology. Each publication has been parsed into separate JSON files with its metadata, authors’ information, abstract, and full manuscript. This study proceeds in the following steps. We first explore the entire collection of PDF-parsed datasets to understand the COVID-19 research landscape. To do this, we establish a pipeline to process these publications’ metadata and abstracts from an extensive collection of JSON files (n=47,731) in a Python environment. Each file includes key information such as title, number of authors, authors’ origin (country), and full texts of its abstract extracted from a research article. We further clean the abstract text data (e.g., removing the stop words, lemmatization, vectorization) to generate a descriptive summary of popular words (single word, bi-gram, and tri-gram), number of authors, and its origin (by the first author). Using [LDA topic modeling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topic_model), we train a model with the processed texts to discover underlying topic groups and corresponding keywords. 

We expect to identify major research interests and a potential small portion that may relate to urban science through this exploratory analysis. We further filter abstract texts based on a list of urban science-related vocabulary, such as  “urban planning”, “public health”, “environment”,  “social distancing”, “transportation”, “mobility”, “housing”, “community”, and  “race”. This process extracts a subset (n=3914) from all manuscripts to further identify publications that may relate to cities and urban science. 

## Quantifying COVID-19 research thematic structure

Analyzing urban-related articles will provide more detailed insights into current research interests and key findings relevant to planning, policy, and operation in cities. Using topic modeling technique, we quantify each article’s thematic composition with four components:

* **Epidemiological** research on infection prevention and control, including the effectiveness of different response strategies and public health measures, such as quarantine, community contact reduction, travel restriction, social distancing at school and workplaces, and personal protective equipment (PPE), and public health digital surveillance. Popular terms representing this theme include “public”, “outbreak”, “pandemic”, “social”, “epidemic”, “spread”, “population”, “transmission”, “global”, “distancing”, “response”, etc. We consider this is the most relevant theme for urban science. 
* **Virological** research on SARS-CoV-2, including its genetics sequence, origin, and evolution of the virus, genomic differences by geography, transmission, incubation, mutation, and stability in various environments. Material studies on viral shedding from humans (stool, urine, blood, nasal discharge), the persistence of virus on different surface material (e,g., copper, stainless steel, plastic), virus’ susceptibility to cleaning or disinfecting agents, the physical science of the virus spread, and decontamination mechanics. Virus transmission patterns involving seasonality, environment (e.g., humidity, temperature), community spread, and asymptomatic transmission during incubation. Popular terms representing this theme include “cell”, “protein”, “virus”, “host”, “immune”, “intracellular”, “gene”, “antiviral”, “replication”, etc.
* **Clinical** trials and medical evidence for therapeutics interventions including the efficacy of treatment, or diagnostics findings on infected patients and antibody testing. Patient descriptions, on virus incubation period, length of hospital stay, asymptomatic likelihood, and viral shedding duration. High-risk patient groups with a medical history and pre-existing conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, cardio and cerebrovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, cancer, chronic kidney or liver disease, obesity. Popular terms representing this theme include “sars”, “influenza”, “mers”, “patient”, “acute”, “clinical”, “pathogen”, “syndrome”, etc.
* **Others** represent miscellaneous themes besides the above three. 

<iframe src="https://public.tableau.com/views/COVID-19OpenResearchViz/Dashboard1?:showVizHome=no&:embed=true"
 width="100%" height="800" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Visualizing urban-related manuscripts

The [interactive dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/views/COVID-19OpenResearchViz/Dashboard1?:language=en&:display_count=y&:toolbar=n&:origin=viz_share_link) enables users to quickly browse urban-related manuscripts in different countries and sorted by relevance to epidemiology. In the next post,  we discuss two questions highly related to urban science: How do epidemiological research findings on virus transmission and community spread to indicate the new norm of urban life?  How social science may contribute to COVID-19 research, especially to address unexpected conflicts and controversies involving socioeconomic equity, environmental justice, data ethics, and policy fairness? 

Since this pandemic, we have witnessed [debates and mistrust in science](https://nationalpost.com/news/a-matter-of-trust-covid-19-pandemic-has-tested-public-confidence-in-science-like-never-before) amid this pandemic, revealing [injustice](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(20)30249-7/fulltext), [biases](https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/04/21/838763690/opinion-u-s-must-avoid-building-racial-bias-into-covid-19-emergency-guidance), and [uncertainty](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(20)30191-1/fulltext) involving treatment, testing, policy, and public services during the pandemic. In MIT Course 11-6 ([Urban Science and Planning with Computer Science](https://urban-science.mit.edu/)), we believe in the importance of addressing broader social, environmental, and political challenges at an urban scale with both technology and planning methods. In Part II, we further discuss how cities and urban science experts can take scientific insights into actions and further contribute to such collective efforts, as well as potential missing data and under-represented population groups. Reflecting on the actual ground responses and different various neighborhood conditions, we conclude by articulating the importance of connecting research insights with actions to enable broader communication and engagement beyond scientific research.